

Data integration involves ingesting, transforming and integrating the
transformed data for access. The data is integrated to allow for analytic
solution development i.e. modeling and analysis. A popular example is
integrating data into a data warehouse so that OLAP (Online Analytical
Processing) servers, DSS (Decision Support) Systems, and other enterprise wise
analytic tools can access the data. The data can also be moved to data marts
within the data architecture so that other parts of the enterprise can access
the data. When there is a data warehouse, data integration can be done with
the assistance of an ETL (extract, transform, and load) mechanism.

Once you have enriched and integrated your data, you are ready to visually
explore your data and perform feature engineering. You might find that feature
engineering is an extension of the transformation process done during data
wrangling.

Data Wrangling to Data Exploration

In the next unit, we will be taking an indepth look into data exploration
techniques. This is typically referred to as Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA).
The results of an EDA exercise can give insights to the project. This is why
it is important to begin the data understanding process with wrangling. At
this point in the data science lifecycle, you have preprocessed your data for
use during the EDA process and beyond. Remember: Data wrangling is not just
for analytic solutions.

The extensiveness of the data understanding phase shows that data quality can
truly make or break an analytic solution. The data wrangling process has now
informed the data science team on the state of their dataset, and might signal
a need to source new data. If new data is sourced, then the data wrangling
process is repeated. This is to say, the data understanding phase is
iterative.

